2028-08-29 001
==============

I need to pick a world size.

Google tells me that in medieval times, people lived as far north as the
mid 60 desgrees in latitude.  I had always assuemed a world should go up
to 80 degrees latitude.  The limit comes down to being able to grow
crops.  So if you can survive without crops, you can live further north.
So between 60 and 80 degrees latitude isn't a place that humans can
settle down, just pass through, and they would be cold and miserablea.
I feel like orcs could survive up to 80 degressin latitude, and I've
always liked the idea of orcs being wolf riding nomads in the cold dark
north.  Nomads makes a lot of sense, because their only food source
would be arctic animals and fish.  I think a good width for a world is
about the size of the United States.

Based on an ideal Earth of 10000km from the equator to the north pole,
where the Tropic of Cancer is at 23.5 degrees, and the Arctic Circle is
at 66.5 degrees, we can simplify down to something nice for this world.

  The Arctic zone, from 80 degrees to 90 degrees.
  The Sub-Arctic zone, from 60 degrees to 80 desgrees.
  The Temperate zone, from 40 degrees to 60 degrees.
  The Arid zone, from from 20 degrees to 40 degrees.
  The Tropical zone, from 0 degrees to 20 degrees.

Based on our assumptions of an ideal Earth, it is 9000km from the
equator to 80 degrees latitude.  That is just over 5592 miles, or 932
six-miles hexes, which divides into four 233 six-mile hex zones.  Both
are suprisingly nicely round numbers.  That leaves 1000km, or almost 104
six-mile hexes to get to the north pole.  I won't include those 104
hexes at the top, so our map is just 932 six-mile hexes tall.  For
simplicity, I shall assume the world is a cylinder, to avoid map
projections, and if someone makes it to the North Pole, they can just
find a cliff edge yawning into the Astral Plane.

Humanity lives easily in the temperate zone, and can live in the arid
and tropical zones.  Journeys into the sub arctic zone are possible, but
settling down to live without outside supplies isn't feasible.

The underdark does exist, and humanity does poorly there.  It is just as
inhospitable to them as the sub-arctic.

As for the width, I like the idea of the map being as large as the
United States.  Assume an ideal Unity States of 2800 miles. Almost three
times as wide as Western Europe, and Western Europe is the basis for the
setting of D&D.  If my map was 467 six-miles hexes across it would cover
that size.  That would be 435244 six-miles hexes.  A lot of hexes for me
to make.  I mentioned Europe, because it is also a fine size for a
campaign world, and much smaller.  My map could be quite generous with
the oceans, perhaps even half the map.

My continent will have two major mountain ranges, one in the east and
one in the west, much like the United States.  Google says the
Appalachian mountains are 50 to 100 miles at the north end (in Canada)
and 200 to 300 at the southern end (in the United States).  I'll need
rivers to come out to have cities on.  There are almost 17 six-mile
hexes per one-hundred miles.

In medieval times, the market laws didn't let markets be closer than
about six miles.  That kept the markets monopolies, and ensured people
were within walking distance (there, and back, with time to buy and
sell).  Not sure why that came to my mind right here...

I should start my map by laying out the mountains.  I should keep in
mind that my mountains are likely caused by tectonic plate movement.
Mostly north/south lines, but not straight.  Then I can flesh out the
mountains into ranges, then add terrainn around it.



