2028-08-28 001
==============

I'm trying to create something that represents a world technologically
stuck in mostly medieval time that has fantasy races, magic, and planar
travel.

I like the medieval setting a lot, but there are things from later
periods I want to have in my world.  An easy example is platinum.  Gary
Gyagx put platinum coins into D&D, but set D&D a world that strongly
imitated our real life medieval times around the 13th and 14th
centuries.  The European societies that Gygax based D&D on didn't
discover platinum until the 1700s.  I want the printing press to exist,
which isn't much of an anachronism (created around 1440 by Johannes
Gutenberg).  I don't want gunpowder or firearms to exist, despite being
very close to the time period that Gary Gygax set D&D in.  But I do like
the idea of pirate ships with canons, so an exception will have to be
made, most likely involving ancient magical devices that can't be
recreated.  I want the modern global food culture to be present in my
setting.

Gary Gygax seemed to believe in a world where humanity was the dominant
race.  There were dwarves, and elves, and halflings, but to him the
story was the story of mankind.  And deep down, I like that premise.
Humanity is the dominant species on the surface, but everyone knows the
others exist.  Most people don't go adventuring, and so never see
anything in their except other humans.

Gary Gygax listed many books in Appendix N.  I'll note down a few, some
that I only read because Gary suggested them.  The will be in the file
appendix-n.

D&D is inherently a post-apocalyptic world, trapped in a medieval time
period.  Adventurers exist because the world is filled with lost
treasure, hidden in secret places, lost cities, deep underground
complexes, and at the bottoms of lakes and oceans.  The world that came
before was more advanced than the world that exists now.  In Jack
Vance's Dying Earth, only about 100 spells still remain of the thousands
that were once known.  Gary Gyagx preceeded his campaign in Oerik with
the Twin Cataclysms of the war between the Sueloise and the Baklunish
people.

I've toyed with various ideas for my post-apocalyptic world.

One favorite was that the planet the campaign exists on was a spherical
battleship (think the Death Star) being used to plunder worlds of their
knowledge of wealth (before detroying them).  The battleship was
besieged by dragon forces of the druid Rune who covered the battleship
in miles of molten nickel and iron, before encasing that in stone, earth
and water.  In essence, making something very much like our molten core
earth, but with a spelljammer in the center full of knowledge and
treasure.  It is a fascinating premise to me, but it is hard to make
that bit of back lore relevant to a campaign.

Another favorite is that the apocalypse that came before was caused by
the illithid.  They arrived in their nautiloid spelljammes and left the
world mostly depopulated.  An alternate version is the planet was
formerly an Illithid slave colony that fell under attack by dwarven
forces who arrived from elsewhere in the multiverse.  A few illithid
survived of course, but the former slaves are what became the modern
civilizations.

I like there to be lots of gods.  Ed Greenwood's Forgotten Realms has a
single supreme god that sits above all others called Lord Ao.  Lord Ao
likely created or promoted all of the other gods that people worship.  I
have good feelings about that ocncept.  In the Gods of Blood and Powder
trilogy (a follow on to the Powder Mage trilogy) by Brian McClellan, the
gods are created through human sacrifice and powerful objects known as
Godstones.  In The Song of the Shattered Sands series by Bradley
P. Beaulieu, the twelve God Kings were created by the current gods in a
deception intended to grant the current gods enough power to traverse to
the land where the previous gods had gone without them.  I like the idea
that most, or almost all, of the gods were once mortals who ascended.

In a campaign where gods are ascended mortals, I often think of the
First God as An, either an Eternal Anvil, or an Eternal Bell.  Either
the universe was forged on the anvil, or the bell was struck and the
universe is the sound it made.  I often imagine a choir of angels, 100
or 101, that surround and sing to An, each with a purpose.  All the gods
that came after, the gods ascended from mortals, gained their power
through their own actions.  Runes escension, for example, could have
been as a result of his armies defeat of the spherical planet destroying
battleship spelljammer.

I need an origin story to explain to myself what the world was before
the apocalypse, and what form the apocalypse took, so that I know how
the world exists in the campaign.  In a recent experiemental campaign I
ran with the premise of the world being an illithid slave world, humand
and elves were native to the world, and the dwarves came to destroy the
illithid colony.  After the dwarves left, some dwarves stayed behind, so
now humans, elves, and dwarves live in the world.  That means that old
dungeons never had any signs of dwarves in them, because dwarves didn't
exist until just before the apocalypse.  Ultimately, I think I'm putting
in too much effort.  A simpler background is needed, so preserve my
mental health.

In the Pathfinder setting of Golarion, the gods made a world.  It was
bright, and extreme, and after the gods made it they set it aside to try
again.  The world is the world of the Fey, and the new world they made
is the world where Golarion is.  I think I like the idea that something
or someone created this world.

Whoever created the campaign world likely added life.  The various races
of humanoid creatures (and/or the demi-humans of old AD&D) were brought
or created by other gods in their own image in this new playground.
Gods we now know as dwarven gods came and made mortal dwarves in their
image.  Gods we now know as elven gods came and made mortal elves in
their own image.  The same for humans.

The intial timeline should be long enough that people (humans) have
forgotten the apocalypse completely.  On the order of 800 to 1500 years.
With my houserule that high elves can live to be 1500 years in age,
there would still be some high elves left who remember the time before
the calendar began, and the high elves would be the only ones who do.
The illithid is an easy choice for what the apocalypse was.  The world
used to be thriving and powerful, and the illithid came to take it.  All
of the cool things that can be found in lost places came from that
previous civilization.  Assume about it took about a thousand years for
civilzation to start reforming.  That means an old high elf alive now
would have heard stories of the apocalyose in their childhood from other
very old high elves, but didn't see it themselves.

When civilization remade itself, the humans were the strongest and
claimed the open lands on rivers and along the sea.  The elves took to
massive forests, and the dwarves to the mountains or the Underdark.  I
keep glossing over halflings, as I think of them as being endemic in
human populations.
